docs: demand control preview (#5399)
apollographql/router: docs/source/executing-operations/demand-control.mdx

---
title: Demand Control
subtitle: Protect your graph from high cost GraphQL operations
description: Protect your graph from malicious or demanding clients with Apollo GraphOS Router's demand control features. Estimate, calculate, observe, and reject high cost GraphQL operations.
minVersion: 1.48.0
---

Protect your graph from malicious or demanding clients with GraphOS Router's demand control features. Estimate, calculate, observe, and reject high cost GraphQL operations.

<EnterpriseFeature />

> <PreviewFeature>

Author: rewriting this into the subtitle

> The Demand Control feature is in [preview](/resources/product-launch-stages/#product-launch-stages) for organizations with an Enterprise plan. Get in touch with your Apollo contact to request access.

Reviewer: That's actually not accurate. Anybody can try it out

> The Demand Control feature is in [preview](/resources/product-launch-stages/#product-launch-stages) for organizations with an Enterprise plan. Get in touch with your Apollo contact to request access.

Author: @chandrikas you mean it's not invite-only, but still requires Enterprise plan?

> The Demand Control feature is in [preview](/resources/product-launch-stages/#product-launch-stages) for organizations with an Enterprise plan. Get in touch with your Apollo contact to request access.

Reviewer: Sorry, that wasn't clear. I mean it is not a invite only preview. It is still an enterprise feature

|           | Mutation | Query | Subscription |
| --------- | -------- | ----- | ------------ |
| Object    | 1        | 1     | 1            |
| Interface | 1        | 1     | 1            |
| Union     | 1        | 1     | 1            |
| Scalar    | 0        | 0     | 0            |
| Enum      | 0        | 0     | 0            |

For example, assume the following query gets a response with six products and ten reviews:

```graphql
query ExampleQuery {
  topProducts {
    name
    reviews {
      author {
        name
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Assuming each review having exactly one author, the total cost of the query is 26.

<ExpansionPanel title="Example query's cost calculation">

```text disableCopy=true showLineNumbers=false
1 Query (0 cost) + 6 product objects (6) + 6 name scalars (0) + 10 review objects (10) + 10 author objects (10) + 10 name scalars (0) = 26 total cost
```

</ExpansionPanel>

### Estimated and actual costs

For an operation with list fields, the router must run the operation to get the actual number of items in its lists. Without actual list sizes, the cost of an operation can only be estimated before it's executed, where you assume the size of lists. 

> After an operation is executed, the actual cost per operation can be calculated with the actual list sizes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After an operation is executed, the router can calculate the actual cost per operation with the actual list sizes.
```

<Note>

> The difference between estimated and actual operation cost calculations is due only to the difference between assumed and actual sizes of list fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The difference between estimated and actual operation costs is due only to the difference between assumed and actual sizes of list fields.
```

</Note>

### Measurement and enforcement modes

> When rolling out demand control, you first need to gather information about the queries that are already being executed against your graph so you can decide when to reject requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When implementing demand control, you must first gather information about the operations being executed against your graph. With this information, can you accurately decide when to reject requests.
```

> The router's demand control supports a measurement mode that enables you to gather this information without impacting your running services. You can define telemetry instruments to monitor your operations and decide on their maximum cost threshold.  

Reviewer 2: If `measurement` and `enforcement` aren't the actual mode names, italics can help distinguish/emphasize these.

```suggestion
The router's demand control supports a _measurement_ mode that enables you to gather this information without impacting your running services. You can define telemetry instruments to monitor your operations and decide on their maximum cost threshold.  
```

> The router's demand control supports a measurement mode that enables you to gather this information without impacting your running services. You can define telemetry instruments to monitor your operations and decide on their maximum cost threshold.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The router's demand control feature (?) supports a measurement mode that enables you to gather this information without impacting your running services. You can define telemetry instruments to monitor your operations and decide on their maximum cost threshold.  
```

> After gathering enough data, you can then configure your router with maximum cost and list size limits and set demand control to enforcement mode, where it rejects operations with costs exceeding the limit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After gathering enough data, you can then configure your router with maximum cost and list size limits and set demand control to _enforcement_ mode, where it rejects operations with costs exceeding the limit.
```

## Configuring demand control

To enable demand control in the router, configure the `preview_demand_control` option in `router.yaml`:

```yaml title="Example demand control configuration"
preview_demand_control:
  enabled: true
  mode: measure
  strategy:
    static_estimated:
      list_size: 10 
      max: 1000 
```

> When `preview_demand_control` is enabled, the router measures the cost of each operation and can enforce operation cost limits, based on additional configuration.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When `preview_demand_control` is enabled, the router measures the cost of each operation and can enforce operation cost limits based on additional configuration.  
```

Customize `preview_demand_control` with the following settings:

> | Option              | Valid values            | Default value | Description                                                                                          |

Reviewer 2: - The options seem like they should be in code font. (enabled, mode, strategy, static_estimated.list_size, etc.)

- For options without default values, it would be clearer to use `none` or `--` to denote there isn't any.

- Some descriptions have periods, others do not.

| ------------------- | ----------------------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| enabled             | boolean                 | `false`       | Set `true` to measure operation costs or enforce operation cost limits.                              |
| mode                | `measure`, `enforce`    |               | - `measure` collects information about the cost of operations.<br/>- `enforce` rejects operations exceeding configured cost limits |
| strategy            | `static_estimated`      |               | `static_estimated` estimates the cost of an operation before it is sent to a subgraph                 |
| static_estimated.list_size  | integer                 |               | The assumed maximum size of a list for fields that return lists.                                      |
| static_estimated.max        | integer                 |               | The maximum cost of an accepted operation. An operation with a higher cost than this is rejected. |

> ## Telemetry for demand control

Reviewer: In this section, we should have a link out to more documentation about advanced telemetry. Anybody not familiar with the feature can find this section a little confusing

Author: added tip with link

You can define router telemetry to gather cost information and gain insights into the cost of operations sent to your router:

- Generate histograms of operation costs by operation name, where the estimated cost is greater than an arbitrary value.
- Attach cost information to spans.

> - Generate log messages whenever the cost delta between estimated and actual is greater than an arbitrary value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Generate log messages whenever the delta between estimated and actual cost is greater than an arbitrary value.
```

### Instruments

| Instrument      | Value | Default | Description                                                |
| --------------- | ----- | ------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
| cost.actual     |       |         | The actual cost of an operation, measured after execution.  |
| cost.estimated  |       |         | The estimated cost of an operation before execution.        |

> | cost.delta      |       |         | The difference between the actual and estimated cost.       |

Reviewer 2: - Is it intended that `Value` and `Default` columns have no values?
- Code font seems appropriate for the instrument names

### Attributes

> Attributes for `cost` can be applied to instruments, spans, and events—anywhere `supergraph` attributes are used.

Reviewer 2: For a separate (Apollopedia) PR, but we should define instruments, spans, and events.

Author: created task DOC-171

> | Attribute      | Value | Default | Description                                                |

Reviewer 2: Is it intentional default values are missing?

Author: removing empty cols

| --------------- | ----- | ------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
| cost.actual     | boolean      |         | The actual cost of an operation, measured after execution.  | 
| cost.estimated  | boolean       |         | The estimated cost of an operation before execution.        |
| cost.delta      | boolean      |         | The difference between the actual and estimated cost.       |
| cost.result      | boolean      |         | The return code of the cost calculation. `COST_OK` or an [error code](../errors/#demand-control)      |

### Selectors

Selectors for `cost` can be applied to instruments, spans, and events—anywhere `supergraph` attributes are used.

| Key  | Value      | Default | Description                                        |
| ---- | ---------- | ------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| cost | estimated, actual, delta, result |         | The estimated, actual, or delta cost values, or the result string |

> #### Examples

Reviewer 2: Are these examples just for `Selectors`? If not, Examples should be an H3 and the examples themselves should have h4 titles rather than be bullet points. (Helpful for sharing examples by anchor text.)

- Enable a `cost.estimated` instrument with the `cost.result` attribute:

```yaml
telemetry
  instrumentation:
    instruments:
      supergraph:
        cost.estimated: true
	  attributes:
            cost.result: true
            graphql.operation.name: string
```

- Enable the `cost.estimated` attribute on `supergraph` spans:

```yaml
telemetry
  instrumentation:
    spans: 
      supergraph: 
        attributes:
          cost.estimated: true
```

- Log an error when `cost.delta` is greater than 1000:

```yaml
telemetry
  instrumentation:
    events: 
      supergraph:
        COST_DELTA_TOO_HIGH:
          message: "cost delta high"
          on: response
          level: error
          condition: 
            gt:
              - cost: delta
              - 1000
          attributes:
            graphql.operation.name: true
            cost.delta: true
```

> ## Demand control workflow

Reviewer 2: This guide feels like it should be above the calculation, configuration, and telemetry sections which are more reference materials.

> Follow the steps of the following workflow to configure and tune demand control for your router:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Follow this workflow to configure and tune demand control for your router:
```

      list_size: 10
      # The maximum cost of a single operation, above which the operation is rejected. 
      max: 1000

# Basic telemetry configuration for cost.
telemetry:
  exporters:
    metrics:
      common:
        views:
	   # Define a custom view because cost is different than the default latency-oriented view of OpenTelemetry
          - name: cost.*
            aggregation:
              histogram:
                buckets:
                  - 0
                  - 10
                  - 100
                  - 1000
                  - 10000
                  - 100000
                  - 1000000
     
      # Example configured for Prometheus. Customize for your APM.
      prometheus:
        enabled: true
     
  # Basic instrumentation
  instrumentation:
    instruments:
      supergraph:
        cost.actual: true        # The actual cost 
        cost.estimated:          # The estimated cost
          attributes:
            cost.result: true    # Of the estimated costs which of these would have been rejected
        cost.delta: true         # Actual - estimated

```

<Tip>

> When analyzing the costs of operations, if your histograms are not granular enough or don't cover sufficient range, you can modify the views in your telemetry configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When analyzing the costs of operations, if your histograms are not granular enough or don't cover a sufficient range, you can modify the views in your telemetry configuration:
```

You can also chart the percentage of operations that would be allowed or rejected with the current configuration:

<img class="screenshot" src="../images/demand-control-example-cost-result.png" width="600" />

Although estimated costs won't necessarily match actual costs, you can use the metrics to ascertain the following: 
- Whether any operations have underestimated costs
- What to set `static_estimated.list_size` as the actual maximum list size
- What to set `static_estimated.max` as the maximum cost of an allowed operation

In this example, just under half of the requests would be rejected with the current configuration. The cost of queries are also underestimated because `cost.delta` is non-zero.

3. To figure out what operations are being rejected, define a telemetry custom instrument that reports when an operation has been rejected because its cost exceeded the configured cost limit:

```yaml title="Example custom instrument to show rejected operations"
telemetry:
  instrumentation:
    instruments:
      supergraph:
        # custom instrument
        cost.rejected.operations:
          type: histogram
          value:

>             cost: estimated                                          # Estimated cost is used to populate the histogram

Reviewer 2: With these comments on the same line, readers have to horizontal scroll the code block. Can they be above the line as in the other examples?
<img width="787" alt="image" src="https://github.com/apollographql/router/assets/23219998/1a47e442-3f5b-4c03-941c-f3244f6dcb72">

          description: "Estimated cost per rejected operation."
          unit: delta
          condition:
            eq:                                                      # Only show rejected operations.
              - cost: result
              - "COST_ESTIMATED_TOO_EXPENSIVE"
          attributes:

>             graphql.operation.name: true                             # Graphql operation name is added as an attribute

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            graphql.operation.name: true                             # GraphQL operation name is added as an attribute
```

```

> This custom instrument may not be suitable for users where there are many operation names, such as a public internet-facing API. You can add conditions to reduce the number of returned operations. For example, use a condition that outputs results only when the cost delta is greater than a threshold:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This custom instrument may not be suitable when you have many operation names, such as a public internet-facing API. You can add conditions to reduce the number of returned operations. For example, use a condition that outputs results only when the cost delta is greater than a threshold:
```

```yaml title="Example condition for cost delta threshold"
telemetry:
  instrumentation:
    instruments:
      supergraph:
        # custom instrument
        cost.rejected.operations:
          condition:
            all:        
              - eq: # Only show rejected operations
                 - cost: result
                 - "COST_ESTIMATED_TOO_EXPENSIVE"
#highlight-start
              - gt: # Only show cost delta > 100
                 - cost: delta
                 - 100
#highlight-end            
```

4. You should now be able to configure your APM to see which operations are too costly. Visualizing the histogram can be useful, such as with top-N or heatmap tools. 

For example, the following table has the estimated cost of operations:

| Operation name      | Estimated cost |
|---------------------|----------------|

> | ExtractAll          | 9020           |

Reviewer 2: Code font for operation names?

| GetAllProducts      | 1435           |
| GetLatestProducts   | 120            |
| GetRecentlyUpdated  | 99             |
| FindProductByName   | 87             |

The `ExtractAll` operation has a very large estimated cost, so it's a good candidate to be rejected.

Also, the value of the `cost.delta` metric—the difference between the actual and estimated cost—shows whether the assumed list size used for cost estimation is too large or small. In this example, the positive `cost.delta` means that the actual list size is greater than the estimated list size. Therefore the `static_estimated.list_size` can be reduced to closer match the actual. 

### Improve cost estimation model

You should iteratively improve your cost estimation model. Accurate cost estimation is critical to identifying and preventing queries that could harm your subgraphs.

> 1. The previous step identified a noticeable difference between actual and estimated costs with the example operations. You can better understand the difference—and consequently tune the configured list size—by adding telemetry instruments for fields in your GraphQL schema.

Reviewer 2: Since there is now step 2, 3, etc. adding a `1.` here feels strange.

```suggestion
The previous step identified a noticeable difference between actual and estimated costs with the example operations. You can better understand the difference—and consequently tune the configured list size—by adding telemetry instruments for fields in your GraphQL schema.
```

<img class="screenshot" src="../images/demand-control-example-updated-costs.png" width="600" />

<img class="screenshot" src="../images/demand-control-example-updated-cost-result.png" width="600" />

Although there are no more cost deltas reported, the estimated costs have increased. You still have to adjust the maximum cost.

Looking at the top N operations, you may see that the estimated costs have been updated. For example:

| Operation name      | Estimated cost |
|---------------------|----------------|
| ExtractAll          | 390200         |
| GetAllProducts      | 44350          |
| GetLatestProducts   | 11200          |
| GetRecentlyUpdated  | 4990           |
| FindProductByName   | 1870           |

All operations except `ExtractAll` are in a range of acceptable costs.

### Enforce cost limits

After determining the cost estimation model of your operations, you should update and enforce the new cost limits.

From the previous step, you can set the maximum cost to a value that allows all operations except `ExceptAll`:

```yaml title="Example enforcing max cost"
preview_demand_control:
  enabled: true

>   mode: enforce               # Change measure->enforce 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  mode: enforce               # Change mode from measure to enforce 
```

  strategy:
    static_estimated:
      list_size: 100 
      max: 50000              # Updated max cost allows all operations except ExtractAll
```

> ### Next steps
> 
> #### Continue monitoring 

Reviewer 2: Next steps feels outside of the workflow

```suggestion
## Next steps

```

---
title: Demand Control
subtitle: Protect your graph from high-cost GraphQL operations
description: Protect your graph from malicious or demanding clients with Apollo GraphOS Router's demand control features. Estimate, calculate, observe, and reject high-cost GraphQL operations.
minVersion: 1.48.0
---

Protect your graph from malicious or demanding clients with GraphOS Router's demand control features. Estimate, calculate, observe, and reject high cost GraphQL operations.

<EnterpriseFeature />

<PreviewFeature>

The Demand Control feature is in [preview](/resources/product-launch-stages/#product-launch-stages) for organizations with an Enterprise plan. Get in touch with your Apollo contact to request access.

> We welcome your feedback during the preview, especially feedback about the following:

Reviewer: One for later - we should add a CTA (a feedback form etc.)

Author: created task DOC-170

      list_size: 100 # Updated to measured actual max list size
      max: 1000
```

Rerunning the router and remeasuring costs with the updated `static_estimated.list_size` should result in new histograms and percentages of rejected operations. For example:

<img class="screenshot" src="../images/demand-control-example-updated-costs.png" width="600" />

<img class="screenshot" src="../images/demand-control-example-updated-cost-result.png" width="600" />

Although there are no more cost deltas reported, the estimated costs have increased. You still have to adjust the maximum cost.

Looking at the top N operations, you may see that the estimated costs have been updated. For example:

| Operation name      | Estimated cost |
|---------------------|----------------|
| ExtractAll          | 390200         |
| GetAllProducts      | 44350          |
| GetLatestProducts   | 11200          |
| GetRecentlyUpdated  | 4990           |
| FindProductByName   | 1870           |

All operations except `ExtractAll` are in a range of acceptable costs.

### Enforce cost limits

After determining the cost estimation model of your operations, you should update and enforce the new cost limits.

> From the previous step, you can set the maximum cost to a value that allows all operations except `ExceptAll`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the previous step, you can set the maximum cost to a value that allows all operations except `ExtractAll`:
```

---
title: Demand Control
subtitle: Protect your graph from high-cost GraphQL operations
description: Protect your graph from malicious or demanding clients with Apollo GraphOS Router's demand control features. Estimate, calculate, observe, and reject high-cost GraphQL operations.
minVersion: 1.48.0
---

<EnterpriseFeature />

<PreviewFeature>

> The Demand Control feature is in [preview](/resources/product-launch-stages/#product-launch-stages) for organizations with an Enterprise plan. Get in touch with your Apollo contact to request access.

Reviewer: This is still inaccurate. They don't need to get in touch with their Apollo contact.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Demand Control feature is in [preview](/resources/product-launch-stages/#product-launch-stages) for organizations with an Enterprise plan.
```
